---
from: mentor
subject: My mental model for SIC-1
---
Greetings, {{self.name}}. I'm also on Don's team and my name is {{from.name}}. Let me know if you ever need any assistance.

After helping Ted with the first assessment, I thought I'd share my perspective on how to think about SIC-1 Assembly Language:

* **Addresses** are just numbers that identify a specific byte of memory (0 for the first byte, 1 for the second, and so on, up to 255)
* **Labels** are just names for addresses--specifically, the address of whatever comes next in your code (whether it's a `subleq` or a `.data`)
* `subleq` always compiles into 3 bytes (each one an address)--if you omit the third address, it just gets set to the address of the next instruction in memory
* `.data` just sets one or more bytes of memory to specific values (positive or negative numbers, or even labels, i.e. addresses)

In the end, everything compiles down to bytes in memory (which you can see in the memory table after you click "Step" or "Run" to load the program). While running, the SIC-1 only sees those bytes in memory, and it doesn't know or care how those bytes were produced (or even modified). It will happily interpret any 3 bytes as a `subleq` instruction--even if that's not what you intended.

It can be instructive to look at a chunk of code and see the resulting compiled bytes. Here's an example:

```
@loop:
subleq @OUT, @IN           ; 3 byte instruction stored at address 0
subleq @zero, @zero, @loop ; 3 byte instruction stored at address 3

@zero: .data 0             ; Initializes address 6 to zero
```

* `@loop` refers to address 0, i.e. the first instruction
* The first `subleq` occupies bytes 0, 1, and 2, and is compiled to: 254 (`@OUT`), 253 (`@IN`), 3 (the next instruction)
* The second `subleq` occupies bytes 3, 4, and 5, and is compiled to: 6 (`@zero`), 6 (`@zero`), 0 (`@loop`)
* `@zero` refers to address 6, i.e. the next byte (which is initialized to zero using the `.data` directive)

As you know by now, the first instruction negates an input and writes it out, then advances to the next instruction (regardless of the result). The second instruction subtracts the value at address 6 from itself, always resulting in zero, and thus always jumps to its third argument: `@loop`, i.e. address 0 (the beginning of the program).

Hope that helps!

-{{from.name}}
